Since July 2007, Coq features a build system overhauled by Pierre
Corbineau and Lionel Elie Mamane.

This file documents what a Coq developer needs to know about the build
system. If you want to enhance the build system itself (or are curious
about its implementation details), see build-system.dev.txt .

The build system is not at its optimal state, see TODO section.

Stages in build system
----------------------

The build system is separated into three stages, corresponding to the
tool(s) necessary to compute the dependencies necessary at this stage:

stage1: ocamldep, sed, camlp4 without Coq extensions
stage2: camlp4 with grammar.cma and/or q_constr.cmo
stage3: coqdep (.vo)

The file "Makefile" itself serves as minimum stage for targets that
should not need any dependency (such as *clean*).

Changes (for old-timers)
------------------------

The contents of the old Makefile has been mostly split into:

 - variable declarations for file lists in Makefile.common.

   These declarations are now static (for faster Makefile execution),
   so their definitions are order-dependent.

 - actual building rules and compiler flags variables in
   Makefile.build


The handling of globals is now: the globals of FOO.v are in FOO.glob
and the global glob.dump is created by concatenation of all .glob
files. In particular, .glob files are now always created.

See also section "cleaning targets"

Reducing build system overhead
------------------------------

When you are actively working on a file in a "make a change, make to
test, make a change, make to test", etc mode, here are a few tips to
save precious time:

 - Always ask for what you want directly (e.g. bin/coqtop,
   foo/bar.cmo, ...), don't do "make world" and interrupt
   it when it has done what you want. This will try to minimise the
   stage at which what you ask for is done (instead of maximising it
   in order to maximise parallelism of the build process).

   For example, if you only want to test whether bin/coqtop still
   builds (and eventually start it to test your bugfix or new
   feature), don't do "make world" and interrupt it when bin/coqtop is
   built. Use "make bin/coqtop" or "make coqbinaries" or something
   like that. This will avoid entering the stage 3, and cut build
   system overhead by 50% (1.2s instead of 2.4 on writer's machine).

 - You can turn off rebuilding of the standard library each time
   bin/coqtop is rebuilt with NO_RECOMPILE_LIB=1.

 - If you want to avoid all .ml4 files being recompiled only because
   grammar.cma was rebuilt, do "make ml4depclean" once and then use
   NO_RECOMPILE_ML4=1.

 - The CM_STAGE1=1 option to make will build all .cm* files mentioned
   as targets on the command line in stage1. Whether this will work is
   your responsibility. It should work for .ml files that don't depend
   (nor directly nor indirectly through transitive closure of the
   dependencies) on any .ml4 file, or where those dependencies can be
   safely ignored in the current situation (e.g. all these .ml4 files
   don't need to be recompiled).

   This will avoid entering the stage2 (a reduction of 33% in
   overhead, 0.4s on the writer's machine).

 - To jump directly into a stage (e.g. because you know nothing is to
   be done in stage 1 or (1 and 2) or because you know that the target
   you give can be, in this situation, done in a lower stage than the
   build system dares to), use GOTO_STAGE=n. This will jump into stage
   n and try to do the targets you gave in that stage.

 - To disable all dependency recalculation, use the NO_RECALC_DEPS=1
   option. It disables REcalculation of dependencies, not calculation
   of dependencies. In other words, if a .d file does not exist, it is
   still created, but it is not updated every time the source file
   (e.g. .ml) is changed.

General speed improvements:

 - When building both the native and bytecode versions, the
   KEEP_ML4_PREPROCESSED=1 option may reduce global compilation time
   by running camlp4o only once on every .ml4 file, at the expense of
   readability of compilation error messages for .ml4 files.

Dependencies
------------

There are no dependencies in the archive anymore, they are always
bootstrapped. The dependencies of a file FOO are in FOO.d . This
enables partial recalculation of dependencies (only the dependencies
of changed files are recomputed).

If you add a dependency to a Coq camlp4 extension (grammar.cma or
q_constr.cmo), then see sections ".ml4 files" and "new files".

Cleaning Targets
----------------

Targets for cleaning various parts:

 - distclean: clean everything; must leave only what should end up in
   distribution tarball and/or is in a svn checkout.

 - clean: clean everything except effect of "./configure" and documentation.

 - cleanconfig: clean effect of "./configure" only

 - archclean:  remove all architecture-dependent   generated files
 - indepclean: remove all architecture-independent generated files
   (not documentation)

 - objclean: clean all generated files, but not Makefile meta-data
   (e.g. dependencies), nor debugging/development information nor
   other cruft (e.g. editor backup files), nor documentation

 - docclean: clean documentation

.ml4 files
----------

The camlp4-preprocessed version of FOO.ml4 is FOO.ml4-preprocessed and
can be obtained with:
 make FOO.ml4-preprocessed

If a .ml4 file uses a grammar extension from Coq (such as grammar.cma
or q_constr.cmo), it must contain a line like:
 (*i camlp4deps: "grammar.cma q_constr.cmo" i*)

If it uses a standard grammar extension, it must contain a line like:
 (*i camlp4use: "pa_ifdef.cmo" i*)

It can naturally contain both a camlp4deps and a camlp4use line. Both
are used for preprocessing. It is thus _not_ necessary to add a
specific rule for a .ml4 file in the Makefile.build just because it
uses grammar extensions.

By default, the build system is geared towards development that may
use the Coq grammar extensions, but not development of Coq's grammar
extensions themselves. This means that .ml4 files are compiled
directly (using ocamlc/opt's -pp option), without use of an
intermediary .ml (or .ml4-preprocessed) file. This is so that if a
compilation error occurs, the location in the error message is a
location in the .ml4 file. If you are modifying the grammar
extensions, you may be more interested in the location of the error in
the .ml4-preprocessed file, so that you can see what your new grammar
extension made wrong. In that case, use the KEEP_ML4_PREPROCESSED=1
option. This will make compilation of a .ml4 file a two-stage process:

1) create the .ml4-preprocessed file with camlp4o
2) compile it with straight ocamlc/opt without preprocessor

and will instruct make not to delete .ml4-preprocessed files
automatically just because they are intermediary files, so that you
can inspect them.

If you add a _new_ grammar extension to Coq:

 - if it can be built at stage1, that is the .ml4 file does not use a
   Coq grammar extension itself, then add it, and all .cmo files it
   needs to STAGE1_TARGETS and STAGE_ML4 in Makefile.common. See the
   handling of grammar.cma and q_constr.cmo for an example.

 - if it cannot be built at stage1, that is the .ml4 file itself needs
   to be preprocessed with a Coq camlp4 grammar extension, then,
   congratulations, you need to add a new stage between stage1 and
   stage2.

New files
---------

For a new file, in most cases, you just have to add it to the proper
file list(s) in Makefile.common, such as ARITHVO or TACTICS.

The list of all ml4 files is not handled manually anymore.

Exceptions are:

 - The file is necessary at stage1, that it is necessary to build the
   Coq camlp4 grammar extensions. In this case, make sure it ends up
   in STAGE1_CMO and (for .ml4 files) STAGE1_ML4. See the handling of
   grammar.cma and/or q_constr.cmo for an example.

 - if the file needs to be compiled with -rectypes, add it to
   RECTYPESML in Makefile.common. If it is a .ml4 file, implement
   RECTYPESML4 or '(*i ocamlflags i*)'; see TODO.

 - the file needs a specific Makefile entry; add it to Makefile.build

 - the files produced from the added file do not match an existing
   pattern or entry in "Makefile". (All the common cases of
   .ml{,i,l,y,4}, .v, .c, ... files that produces (respectively)
   .cm[iox], .vo, .glob, .o, ... files with the same basename are
   already covered.) In this case, see section "New targets".

New targets
-----------

If you want to add:

 - a new PHONY target to the build system, that is a target that is
   not the name of the file it creates,

 - a normal target is not already mapped to a stage by "Makefile"

 then:

 - add the necessary rule to Makefile.build, if any
 - add the target to STAGEn_TARGETS, with n being the smallest stage
   it can be built at, that is:
   * 1 for OCaml code that doesn't use any Coq camlp4 grammar extension
   * 2 for OCaml code that uses (directly or indirectly) a Coq
       camlp4 grammar extension. Indirectly means a dependency of it
       does.
   * 3 for Coq (.v) code.

   *or*

   add a pattern matching the target to the pattern lists for the
   smallest stage it can be built at in "Makefile".

TODO
----

delegate pa_extend.cmo to camlp4use statements and remove it from
standard camlp4 options.

maybe manage compilation flags (such as -rectypes or the CoqIDE ones)
from a
 (*i ocamlflags: "-rectypes" i*)
statement in the .ml(4) files themselves, like camlp4use. The CoqIDE
files could have
 (*i ocamlflags: "${COQIDEFLAGS}" i*)
and COQIDEFLAGS is still defined (and exported by) the Makefile.build.

Clean up doc/Makefile

config/Makefile looks like it contains a lot of unused variables,
clean that up (are any maybe used by nightly scripts on
pauillac?). Also, the COQTOP variable from config/Makefile (and used
in contribs) has a very poorly chosen name, because "coqtop" is the
name of a Coq executable! For example, in the Coq makefile it is
immediately clobbered by "bin/coqtop$(EXE)"! Rename it to COQROOT or
COQTREE or COQDIR or ...

Promote the granular .glob handling to official way of doing things
for Coq developments, that is implement it in coq_makefile and the
contribs. Here are a few hints:

>> Les fichiers de constantes produits par -dump-glob sont maintenant
>> produits par fichier et sont ensuite concaténés dans
>> glob.dump. Ilsont produits par défaut (avec les bonnes
>> dépendances).

> C'est une chose que l'on voulait faire aussi.

(J'ai testé et débogué ce concept sur CoRN dans les derniers mois.)

> Est-ce que vous sauriez modifier coq_makefile pour qu'il procède de
> la même façon

Dans cette optique, il serait alors plus propre de changer coqdep pour
qu'il produise directement l'output que nous mettons maintenant dans
les .v.d (qui est celui de coqdoc post-processé avec sed).

Si cette manière de gérer les glob devient le standard béni
officiellement par "the Coq development team", ne voudrions nous pas
changer coqc pour qu'il produise FOO.glob lors de la compilation de
FOO.v par défaut (sans argument "-dump-glob")?

> et que la production de a.html par coqdoc n'ait une dépendance qu'en
> les a.v et a.glob correspondant ?

Je crois que coqdoc exige un glob-dump unique, il convient donc de
concaténer les .glob correspondants. Soit un glob-dump global par
projet (par Makefile), soit un glob-dump global par .v(o), qui
contient son .glob et ceux de tous les .v(o) atteignables par le
graphe des dépendances. CoRN contient déjà un outil de calcul de
partie atteignable du graphe des dépendances (il y est pour un autre
usage, pour calculer les .v à mettre dans les différents tarballs sur
http://corn.cs.ru.nl/download.html; les parties partielles sont
définies par liste de fichiers .v + toutes leurs dépendances
(in)directes), il serait alors adéquat de le mettre dans les tools de
Coq.

